JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
deadly Paris
attack overshadows the last day
of campaigning
ahead of Sunday voting in
France's tight presidential
race.
Then, one-on-one with U.N.
Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his first
U.S. television
interview.
ANTONIO GUTERRES, United Nations
Secretary-General:
The truth is that the Security
Council has
been, now for a large period,
essentially
divided, not only on Syria, on
several other
situations.
And that division has led to
paralysis.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead:
missing children.
Recent cases in Washington,
D.C., highlight
unique challenges in cases
involving missing
children of color.
DERRICA WILSON, President, Black
and Missing
Foundation, Inc.: There's a term
that's often
used, which is the missing white
women syndrome,
where if you're not with blonde
hair and blue
eyes, your story is just not
sensational enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and Michael Gerson
are here to
analyze the week's news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Investigators in
France are
trying to piece together what
sparked Thursday's
deadly assault in Paris.
A gunman shot a police officer
to death and
wounded two more, before being
killed himself.
Hari Sreenivasan reports on the
day's developments.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Masked police
descended
this morning on a Paris suburb,
home of the
suspect in the deadly attack on
the Champs
Elysees.
Prosecutors identified him as
Karim Cheurfi,
a French citizen, and said he
carried a note
in support of the Islamic State.
Cheurfi had served time for
trying to kill
two other officers in 2001.
FRANCOIS MOLINS, Paris
Prosecutor (through
translator): All the way through
his period
of imprisonment, which lasted
about 14 years,
he didn't show any signs of
radicalization
or signs of conversion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He was
detained again in
February for threatening police,
but later
released.
Then came the attack on the
Champs Elysees.
The famed boulevard was shut
down for hours.
Near the scene today, witnesses
described
the chaos.
WOMAN (through translator): I
can tell you
that I was very scared.
People started talking and going
crazy.
There was a wave of panic that
came over everything.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All of this
just two days
before polls open in the
presidential election.
The prime minister sought to
calm fears.
BERNARD CAZENEUVE, French Prime
Minister (through
translator): The government is
completely
mobilized.
More than 50,000 policemen will
be mobilized
to guarantee the peace.
HARI SREENIVASAN: President
Trump weighed
in on Twitter, predicting the
attack -- quote
-- "will have a big effect on
the presidential
election."
Later, he told the Associated
Press it will
probably help far-right
candidate Marine Le
Pen.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will have a
full report
on the impending French election
later in
the program.
In the day's other news: The
Justice Department
formally notified nine state and
local jurisdictions
that they will lose some federal
grant money
over so-called sanctuary cities.
Letters sent out today demand
proof that the
jurisdictions are not sheltering
undocumented
immigrants.
The letters went to New York,
Chicago, Philadelphia,
Miami and the state of
California, among others.
President Trump today ordered a
review of
major tax and financial
regulations put in
place under President Obama.
He signed directives to look at
reforms imposing
greater oversight of large
financial institutions.
He also wants to review
corporate tax rules
on sheltering income overseas.
The president also promised
today that he
will have a -- quote -- "big
announcement"
on a tax reform package next
Wednesday.
That would be just before his
100th day in
office.
At the same time, the White
House signaled
that a new effort to repeal and
replace Obamacare.
But as he left the Treasury
Department, Mr.
Trump was less definite about
the timing of
that.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
No particular rush, but we will
see what happens.
But health care is coming along
well.
Government is coming along
really well.
Lot of good things are
happening.
Thank you, folks.
(CROSSTALK)
DONALD TRUMP: No, no, it doesn't
matter if
it's next week.
Next week doesn't matter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Earlier, on
Twitter, the president
dismissed any criticism of how
much he has
actually done so far.
He wrote -- quote -- "No matter
how much I
accomplish during the ridiculous
standard
of the first 100 days, it has
been a lot.
Media will kill."
The U.S. Treasury Department has
denied ExxonMobil's
request that one of its projects
be exempted
from sanctions imposed on
Russia, so the company
can drill for oil in the Black
Sea.
The joint venture has been
halted since the
U.S. imposed the sanctions for
Russia's annexation
of Crimea.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
was Exxon's
CEO back when the deal was
signed.
He recused himself from
considering this waiver
issue.
South Korea said today that it's
on high alert
again ahead of a military
holiday in North
Korea and a possible nuclear
test.
At the same time, President
Trump pressed
China in a new tweet.
He wrote: "China is very much
the economic
lifeline to North Korea, so, if
they want
to solve the problem, they
will."
The Chinese Foreign Ministry
insisted that
Beijing is enforcing a ban on
coal imports
from Pyongyang.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesman
(through translator): The
Chinese Customs
and Ministry of Commerce have
issued the notice.
As for some reports saying North
Korean coal
ships are docking in Chinese
ports, due to
humanitarian considerations for
those crew
members, we cannot simply leave
them drifting
on the sea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: North Korea said
overnight
that the situation is -- quote
-- "extremely
perilous" because of what it
called madcap
American nuclear war maneuvers.
U.S. Defense Secretary Jim
Mattis says there
is no doubt that Syria still has
chemical
weapons.
In Israel today, he warned the
Syrians would
be ill-advised to use such
weapons again.
The U.S. attacked a Syrian air
base after
a poison gas incident this
month.
Back in this country, the state
of Arkansas
is planning three more
executions next week,
after it carried out its first
one since 2005.
Ledell Lee was put to death just
before midnight
for a 1993 murder.
The execution came despite a
flurry of legal
challenges.
Protests continued last night
outside the
governor's mansion.
The power went out across a wide
swathe of
San Francisco today.
About 90,000 customers were
affected, with
people trapped in elevators, and
traffic backed
up at stoplights that didn't
work.
Utility officials blamed a
catastrophic failure
at a substation that led to a
fire at that
site.
Late today, they were still
working to get
electricity restored.
A federal judge in Detroit has
ordered Volkswagen
to pay a criminal penalty of
$2.8 billion
for cheating on diesel emissions
tests.
The order today came as part of
a plea deal.
The case involved nearly 600,000
diesel cars
sold in the U.S.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average lost about 31 points to
close at 20547.
The Nasdaq fell six points, and
the S&P 500
slipped seven.
For the week, the Dow gained
half-a-percent,
the Nasdaq rose nearly 2
percent, and the
S&P 500 was up almost 1 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
France votes
in the first round of a hotly
contested presidential
election; one-on-one with the
new boss of
the United Nations; missing
children, the
dangers they face and why
children of color
often get less attention from
the news media;
and much more.
As we reported earlier, the
White House announced
today that efforts to repeal and
replace the
Affordable Care Act will
continue this weekend,
ahead of Congress' return to
Washington.
Joining me to talk about the
latest developments
is White House correspondent
John Yang.
So, John, Congress coming back
next week.
Before they left, there was talk
of trying
to resurrect some sort of deal
on health care
reform.
Where does it stand?
JOHN YANG: Well, Judy, talking
to senior White
House officials today, there is
a glimmer,
a glimmer of optimism that their
efforts to
bring together the conservative
and moderate
factions of the House
Republicans has led
to language that just may
satisfy both sides.
They hope to present that
language to lawmakers
on a conference call, a House
Republican conference
call tomorrow to get a better
sense of where
things stand.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, John, there
seems to be
a little bit of a -- if not a
misunderstanding,
at least a back and forth on the
timetable
here.
On the one hand, they seem to be
in a hurry
to get it done.
On the other hand, we just heard
the president
saying, well, it doesn't really
matter whether
it's next week.
JOHN YANG: Well, that's right.
You heard the president said
that.
And Sean Spicer, the White House
press secretary
said, if we get it done next
week, great.
If we don't, no problem.
We will get it done when we have
the votes.
But there are others, other
officials in this
White House who would love it if
they could
get a vote before that symbolic
100 days of
the administration are up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, John, one
other thing
that is on the agenda next week
is funding
for the government.
The temporary arrangement they
had runs out
at the end of the week.
Where do they stand on that?
JOHN YANG: Well, this afternoon,
OMB Director
Mitt Mulvaney had a conference
call directing
department heads to prepare for
a possible
government showdown, but he and
other White
House officials say they are
confident it
will not happen, that the
government funding
will continue one way or
another.
But they also -- a senior
administration official
also says that these talks could
tell us a
lot about the next four years
and the willingness
of both sides to compromise --
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Well, we will be watching.
John Yang at the White House,
thank you.
France is on edge ahead of
Sunday's presidential
election, after last night's
attack in Paris.
The vote, which features an
array of candidates,
is the first of two rounds.
Independent centrist candidate
Emmanuel Macron
appears in the polls to hold a
slight edge
over Marine Le Pen.
She is the leader of the far
right-wing anti-immigrant
National Front, and is hoping
for a Trump-style
win to upend the traditional
establishment.
The top two vote-getters will
compete in the
second and final round on May 7.
From Paris, special
correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Heavily armed
police were
patrolling the Champs Elysees
this morning
in a high-profile show of force.
Others carried flowers to honor
a fallen colleague,
providing a stark contrast on
the opposite
side of the grandest of Parisian
boulevards.
At the place where the officer
was killed,
union official Denis Jacob had
this message.
DENIS JACOB, France (through
translator):
Society mustn't fall into a mass
psychosis.
People shouldn't be paranoid
that someone
can come behind their back and
kill them.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This shooting
is the latest
in a series of terrorist attacks
in France
over the past couple of years.
It began with the massacre at
the Charlie
Hebdo satirical magazine, and
then, on November
the 13th, with the shootings at
the Bataclan
music club and across Paris, and
then in July
last year in Nice, when there
was the truck
massacre.
The death toll over the past
couple of years
is around the 230 mark.
There may only have been a
handful of casualties
last night, but the timing of
this shooting
could not have been more
significant.
Political analyst Jean-Yves
Camus doesn't
believe the attack will
drastically impact
the outcome of Sunday's vote,
but has this
proviso:
JEAN-YVES CAMUS, Political
Analyst: If there's
going to be a benefit,
certainly, Marine Le
Pen will benefit from the fact
that this was
a jihadi attack, that,
apparently, what we
know this morning, the guy came
from Belgium
or was a Belgian citizen.
So, she will say, I want to
bring back borders.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Immigration
control is Marine
Le Pen's signature message.
She has sanitized the party in
recent years
to broaden its mainstream
appeal.
She replaced her nationalist
father as leader,
expelled him from the party for
his racist
and anti-Semitic statements, and
she watered
down the Front's extreme
right-wing tendencies.
MARINE LE PEN, French
Presidential Candidate
(through translator): I'm
telling you that
what's at stake on Sunday, and I
have repeated
it tirelessly over the campaign
because I
believe it.
It is civilization.
On Sunday, the choice is simple:
either a
France reborn, or a France that
founders.
I'm telling you that I intend to
protect you.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But as this
brief protest
demonstrates, Marine Le Pen's
detractors regard
her as the most divisive of
political leaders.
They abhor her attempts to wrap
herself in
the flag.
MARINE LE PEN (through
translator): I love
France.
I love it from the bottom of my
heart, from
the bottom of my soul.
I am a woman, and, as such, I
feel with extreme
violence all the restrictions of
our freedom
that we're seeing within our
country because
of the developing Islamic
fundamentalism.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Mikael Sala is
on Le Pen's
campaign team.
MIKAEL SALA, Le Pen Adviser:
Donald Trump
was saying, we're going to make
America great
again, and we're going to make
America grow
again.
Well, this is exactly what
Marine Le Pen will
do for France.
She will make it great again.
And the French, they really
aspire to that.
They want France to be great
again, and they
feel in their gut that Marine Le
Pen is that
person.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The potential
impact of Le
Pen's policies would be felt
most keenly in
Barbes, a Parisian district
dominated by immigrants.
France has nine million people
living beneath
the poverty line, and this
market represents
a snapshot.
Habiba Belhout, a Muslim,
supports the Socialist
candidate who's trailing in
fifth place.
She is concerned by Le Pen's
rhetoric.
HABIBA BELHOUT, France (through
translator):
Well, she's a racist, first of
all.
It really gives the impression
that we're
going decades back, back to 1939
to 1945.
She talks about the Muslims,
about immigration,
when there's so much more.
more problems than that to deal
with.
And, yesterday, I heard her say
she was the
only woman candidate who defends
women.
Well, I'm sorry, but she doesn't
represent
me at all.
MALCOLM BRABANT: According to
opinion polls,
the current front-runner is
Emmanuel Macron,
who abandoned the Socialists and
set up his
own independent party called On
the Move,
to attract those who yearn for a
moderate
middle-ground candidate.
WOMAN: The main contestants in
this election
are either the far right or the
far left.
And I think that's not what we
want in France.
We don't want a racist, nor a
communist president
for France.
And I think there are solutions
other than
extreme solutions for the
country.
I'm pro-European and I'm for
progressive solutions
for my country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Macron is a
39-year-old former
investment banker, and reputedly
a millionaire.
As a former economy minister in
the Socialist
government, he's promising to
simultaneously
reduce unemployment, while
removing 120,000
civil servants.
EMMANUEL MACRON, French
Presidential Candidate
(through translator): In France,
in this wounded
country, in this weary country,
we don't want
tomorrow to be like yesterday.
And I'm making a commitment
before you here
this afternoon.
You, who are the living part of
France, the
beating heart of France, we will
give France
back its optimism, its faith in
the future.
BARACK OBAMA, Former President
of the United
States: Hello.
EMMANUEL MACRON: Hello, Mr.
President.
How are you?
MALCOLM BRABANT: And Macron got
an unusual
boost yesterday before the
attack: a call
from former President Barack
Obama, which
Macron quickly tweeted out.
BARACK OBAMA: The main message I
have is to
wish you all the best in the
coming days.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Former
conservative Prime
Minister Francois Fillon could
be forgiven
for looking enviously at
Macron's poll numbers.
Fillon was once regarded as the
favorite to
become president, but his
popularity slumped
after he was placed under
investigation for
misuse of public funds.
But analysts believe the
shooting might help
him make a comeback.
In France, there are normally
two presidential
election rounds.
The two leading candidates from
the first
round contest the second.
For teacher Veronique Dadou, her
main concern
is the future of her students,
which is why
she has turned to the hard-left
candidate,
Jean-Luc Melenchon, who has had
an unexpected
surge in popularity.
VERONIQUE DADOU, France (through
translator):
The one thing that blocks
everything else
is unemployment, and that has a
direct impact
on the young people, because
they're the ones
who are prevented from accessing
a decent,
proper social life.
Their personal development,
everything's on
hold for them because of that.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But this
Melenchon rally
earlier in the week was
overshadowed by news
that the security services had
arrested two
Islamists in Marseille who were
allegedly
planning an attack on one of the
campaigns.
JEAN-LUC MELENCHON, French
Presidential Candidate
(through translator): We are not
afraid, and,
even tonight, we are
demonstrating this.
Let's have even more debate,
respectful debate,
but debate nonetheless, to show
that nothing
will conquer our democracy, and
that criminals
can do nothing against it.
The French people are free.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The Le Pen camp
plays up
similarities with the Trump
campaign, but
according to analyst Jean-Yves
Camus, Americans
should be wary.
JEAN-YVES CAMUS: The impact for
the United
States will be bad, because
Marine Le Pen
belongs to those kind of radical
right parties
which are highly prejudiced
against the United
States.
This is because she doesn't want
the United
States to have a prominent say
in international
affairs.
She wants to opt out of NATO.
She wants to end free trade.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Sunday's first
round is considered
to be the most unpredictable
election in decades.
A third of all voters are said
to be undecided.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Paris.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to my
interview with United
Nations Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres.
He took office on January 1,
after a decade
as head of the U.N.'s Refugee
Agency.
I sat down with him this
afternoon for his
first American television
interview since
becoming secretary-general.
We spoke at the World Bank here
in Washington,
where he is attending the annual
meeting of
the bank and International
Monetary Fund.
Mr. Secretary-General, thank you
for talking
with us.
ANTONIO GUTERRES, United Nations
Secretary-General:
Pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You were at the
White House
earlier today.
You met briefly with President
Trump.
You also spent some time with
the national
security adviser, H.R. McMaster.
What did you discuss?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: Well, we
discussed, of course,
the problems of the world, and
especially
how the U.N. and the U.S. can
cooperate better.
It is, for me, clear that the
world needs
a United States that is engaged
in security
issues, in development issues,
in human rights
issues.
The contribution of the United
States for
global affairs is absolutely
crucial.
And the cooperation with the
U.N. is very
important from our perspective.
And I presume the U.N. can also
be very useful
to the United States, especially
if we will
be able, as I strongly intend,
to have a more
dynamic, more reformed, more
nimble U.N.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I ask because we
have been
hearing -- we know that this --
because this
president has said so, he has
concerns that
the U.N. and other international
organizations
have already gotten a lot of
support from
the U.S., and now may be a good
time for the
U.S. to pull back, and to pull
back in foreign
aid, in humanitarian aid.
How concerned are you that they
may do that?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: Well, he also
said that
the U.N. has a lot of potential.
I think it's my role to try to
prove that
that potential can be translated
into reality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you do
that?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: Well, we need
to be able
to demonstrate that what we do
in today's
world, in humanitarian aid, the
enormous effort
to minimize the tragic
situations that we
see all over the world, I think,
without the
U.N., people would suffer much
more, and the
situation would be much more
terrible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But this is a
president who
has spoken about pulling back,
pulling the
U.S. back from the rest of the
world, except
maybe, now we see, in a military
sense.
Are you worried about that?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: I think the
U.S. is too
important for the U.S. to be
possible to pull
back.
I think that it's very important
to have the
United States' engagement in
many situations
we have around the world, be it
in Syria,
be it in the African context.
The United States represents an
important
set of values, human rights,
values related
to freedom, to democracy.
And so the foreign policy
engagement of the
United States is a very
important guarantee
that those values can be
properly pursued.
And, in that regard, the
cooperation between
the U.S. and U.N. is absolutely
essential
for those values to be preserved
in our world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But are you not
at all concerned
about cuts in U.S. contributions
to the United
Nations and to the other U.N.
agencies?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: Well, I hope
those cuts
will not materialize.
And I hope that we -- we need to
do better
and to do more.
And we need to be able also to
be more cost-effective.
And we are ready to discuss with
the United
States how to make our work more
able to correspond
also to what it is the
aspiration of the American
people.
But it is my deep belief that
when a country
is so concerned -- there are so
strong reasons
to be concerned with global
terrorism, with
the security of the American
people -- that
it is very important to
recognize that that
is not possible to guarantee if,
at the same
time, the country is not very
active in addressing
the root causes of terror.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you
mentioned terrorism.
You mentioned security.
There is focus today on Paris.
They're calling it a terrorist
attack.
There's every reason to believe
this is going
to raise concerns in leading up
to the French
elections this weekend, pushing
the -- what
is already an anti-foreigner
sentiment to
be even stronger.
As someone who heads the
preeminent international
organization, the U.N., how
concerned are
you about that?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: I was -- for
10 years, I
was the United Nations high
commissioner for
refugees.
And I always fought for the
possibility for
those that flee conflict in
desperate situations
to have access to international
protection.
That is absolutely crucial.
It's an essential democratic
value.
What I think it's important to
recognize in
today's world is that all of our
societies
are multiethnic, multi-religious
and multicultural.
And that is a positive thing.
That's a richness, and also
strength.
But we also have to recognize
that, for those
societies to be harmonious,
there is a lot
of the investment that needs to
be made in
social cohesion and inclusivity.
But the important thing to
recognize, and
particularly Europe, most of the
terrorist
attacks are not done by people
that came from
the outside.
They are homegrown.
And I think, in North America,
both in Canada
and the United States, it has
been much easier
for communities to live together
than in several
European countries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So much to ask
you about, Mr.
Secretary-General.
One thing I don't want to leave
out, of course,
is Syria.
People look at the U.N.
The U.N. has been involved in
trying to find
peace in Syria.
It hasn't happened.
There are critics saying the
Security Council
is paralyzed, hasn't been able
to move on
Syria.
There's a very critical story
coming out of
The New York Times over the
weekend looking
at the failure of the U.N., the
U.N. system,
to be able to deal with
something like Syria.
How do you look at Syria?
How do you see the
responsibility of the U.N.
there?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: With peace
about security,
there is a central body.
And that body is the Security
Council.
It is the Security Council that
has the responsibility
to preserve peace and to address
the situations
of conflict.
The truth is that the Security
Council has
been, now for a large period,
essentially
divided, not only on Syria, on
several other
situations.
And that division has led to
paralysis of
the capacity of the
international community
to come together and to push for
an effective
political solution in Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what can be
done about
it?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: Now, it's high
time for
all those that have an influence
on the parties
with the conflict to understand
that it is
in the interest of everybody to
put an end
to this conflict.
But this kind of persuasion,
this kind of
intense pressure, I believe it's
my duty to
do, even if I recognize that the
contradictions
and the different perceptions of
interest
that exist are making it very
difficult.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this is
clearly a priority
for you?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: It is a
priority for me.
To see these people that has
been so hospitable
to others now suffering so much,
and being
rejected also in so many parts
of the world,
it really breaks my heart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two other things
I want to
ask you about.
One is the reports recently
building on previous
reports about U.N. peacekeepers
in different
parts of the world being guilty
of the worst
kind of sexual abuse, sexual
assault on vulnerable
people, women, children, boys,
girls.
Now that this is coming into the
open, what
is the responsibility of the
U.N. to make
sure this doesn't happen again,
and are people
being held accountable for it?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: Well, it is a
huge responsibility.
And I have taken it very
seriously.
One of the first reforms I
presented already
to the General Assembly was
exactly on redesigning
all our capacity to respond to
sexual exploitation
and abuse, and trying to create
the conditions
to mobilize member states to
assume their
responsibilities.
We -- U.N., we cannot condemn a
soldier to
jail because of that.
It must be the country to which
the soldier
belongs.
But we need to be able to create
the conditions
for that to be possible.
And we need to do the job
ourselves of a much
better protection of the
victims.
We must be absolutely
determined, with a
zero-tolerance
policy in this regard.
But we also need to pay tribute
to those that
are sacrificing their lives to
protect other
lives, and that -- sometimes
also do not see
that properly recognized.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last question.
You were not very long ago on
the African
continent.
We know there are four different
countries
experiencing famine to one
degree or another,
not because of a lack of food,
but because
of conflict.
And you have spoken about this.
It's received some attention.
How do you get others to
understand the problem?
Because every country has a
different reason
for the conflict in each one.
How do you get the rest of the
world to pay
attention, to make a difference,
when people
are -- who don't deserve to die
are dying
by the thousands and more?
ANTONIO GUTERRES: We are doing
our best to
raise awareness and to mobilize
the international
community in support to the
victims of these
situations.
We had recently in Oslo a
conference on the
Lake Chad Basin.
I'm doing on Tuesday to Geneva
for a conference,
pledging conference, to support
the victims
in Yemen.
We will have another conference
in London
on Somalia.
So, we are really trying to
mobilize the international
community in order to have an
adequate response,
knowing that that response
cannot be only
humanitarian.
That response -- as you said,
when you said
that the real reason for this
famine is the
conflict, that response needs to
be political.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr.
Secretary-General, you
have a full plate.
And we thank you very much for
talking with
us today.
ANTONIO GUTERRES: It was a
pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and Michael Gerson analyze the
week's news;
and In My Humble Opinion,
reflections on our
addiction to technology.
But first: missing children and
a racial divide.
When the Washington, D.C.,
Police Department
tried to raise awareness about
missing children
and teenagers by posting their
images on social
media, the campaign backfired,
sparking some
national outrage and fears of an
epidemic
of missing children of color.
But the story also exposed many
risks that
young people face when they
leave home, including
exploitation and sex
trafficking.
William Brangham has our report.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On a recent
night in downtown
Washington, D.C., a drop-in
center for homeless
and at-risk youth begins to fill
up.
There's pizza, and games, and a
movie in the
back.
Gabrielle Martin is a regular in
this refuge,
which is run by the nonprofit
Sasha Bruce
Youthwork.
GABRIELLE MARTIN, Homeless: I
have been on
my own, basically, since I was
15.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Fifteen years
old?
GABRIELLE MARTIN: Mm-hmm.
And now I'm 27, so I have been
homeless for
12 years.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Young people
here have access
to food, showers and a place to
relax for
a few hours.
Martin says this center is
essential, because
homeless life can be exhausting.
GABRIELLE MARTIN: It can get
frustrating sometimes,
like, not knowing how you're
going to eat
or where you're going to sleep
the next day.
Sometimes, we will just find
excuses to go
to the hospital, just so that we
have somewhere
to sleep that night, you know?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Martin first
ran away from
home in high school, after
coming out as gay
to her disapproving parents.
She says she's struggled with
drug addiction
and has bounced in and out of
various living
situations ever since.
GABRIELLE MARTIN: If I wasn't in
the streets,
I was at different friends'
houses, or I would
actually date people that I knew
had their
own place, just so I could stay
there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That led to a
pregnancy
with someone she was living
with.
Martin's parents reported her
missing around
the time she turned 17, and up
until last
December, she says she was still
considered
a missing person by Washington,
D.C., police.
GABRIELLE MARTIN: Even though
I'm 27 now,
I was still considered a runaway
because I
ran away when I was a juvenile.
So, it was still in their --
it's still in
their system.
WOMAN: The desperate search for
missing teens
in Washington, D.C.
WOMAN: Outrage about missing
children in the
District.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A spate of
more recent cases
in the nation's capital were
thrust into the
spotlight last month after
Washington, D.C.,
police, for the first time,
started posting
alerts about all missing
children on social
media.
Prior to this year, they would
usually only
notify the public of missing
children when
they suspected foul play.
But after celebrities like Viola
Davis and
LL Cool J retweeted the alerts,
the story
went viral, fueling concerns
that D.C. had
a sudden epidemic of missing
kids.
WOMAN: We can't go nowhere by
ourselves.
We can't do nothing, because
we're all just
get worried about somebody
trying to take
us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The story
turned out to
be largely overblown.
Not only was there was not a
spike in missing
kids, but 2016 saw fewer
children go missing
than the year before.
However, Washington, D.C.,
acting Police Chief
Peter Newsham doesn't regret
using social
media to highlight these cases.
PETER NEWSHAM, Acting
Washington, D.C., Police
Chief: It took on some legs that
we hadn't
anticipated, but I do think that
it was an
eye-opener for a lot of people
to see how
many young people we do have
that run away.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Newsham also
says that nearly
all the missing kids are
located.
PETER NEWSHAM: We find 99
percent of those
kids.
I think the awareness that has
come about
as a result of this, though, is
a lot of people
are asking the question, why are
they leaving
in the first place?
And the other question which is
really important
to get to the bottom of is, what
happened
to them while they were away?
DERRICA WILSON, President, Black
and Missing
Foundation, Inc.: Regardless of
why a child
is going missing, we need to
find out what
are they running away from and
who they're
running away to.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Derrica Wilson
is the president
of the Black and Missing
Foundation.
While she applauds D.C.'s
attempt to raise
awareness, she says that, for
too long, the
media and public officials have
ignored cases
of children of color going
missing.
In fact, according to the FBI,
while blacks
make up just 13 percent of the
U.S. population,
they make up more than 38
percent of all missing
youth.
WOMAN: It's heart-wrenchingly
frustrating
that we don't have answers as to
where she
is right now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For example,
8-year-old
Relisha Rudd went missing in
Washington in
2014.
At the time, her mother begged
for her daughter's
return.
SHAMIKA YOUNG, Mother: Come back
home to your
mother safely and unarmed.
And I love you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Over three
years later,
she's still missing, and Wilson
says Relisha
Rudd never became a household
name, not like
Chandra Levy, or Natalee
Holloway, or even
the more recent case of
Elizabeth Thomas,
the Tennessee 15-year-old who
was kidnapped
by her teacher, and found
yesterday.
MAN: A FOX News alert now on a
nationwide
manhunt coming to an end, and
apparently a
successful one.
Fifteen-year-old Elizabeth
Thomas is safe.
DERRICA WILSON: This is not an
epidemic that
just popped up.
This is something that's been
going on for
quite some time.
There's a term that's often
used, which is
the missing white women
syndrome, where if
you're not with blonde hair and
blue eyes,
your story is just not
sensational enough.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Even the
terminology we
use about missing kids needs to
change, according
to Robert Lowery, vice president
at the National
Center for Missing and Exploited
Children.
His organization no longer uses
the term runaway.
ROBERT LOWERY, Vice President,
National Center
for Missing and Exploited
Children: Because
the moment we put on our poster
that this
is a runaway child, we deal with
a desensitized
public, a desensitized media.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Because people
just think,
oh, they ran away, it's their
fault in some
way.
ROBERT LOWERY: This child ran
away because
they're a behavioral problem.
And that's not the case.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: When she was a
kid in Chicago,
Tina Frundt left home after a
typical teenage
fight.
TINA FRUNDT, Founder, Courtney's
House: On
my 14th birthday, I got mad at
my parents
because I couldn't stay out past
7:00.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: She called a
man who had
befriended her, but he kidnapped
her, took
her to Cleveland and forced her
to work for
his grandmother, who ran a local
prostitution
ring.
TINA FRUNDT: He came from a
family of pimps,
so his grandmother is actually
the one who
controlled us.
She used to tell me that God
wanted me to
be a ho, and that's what we were
put on earth
for.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A year into
her ordeal,
the police raided the home and
she was freed.
While her trafficker never faced
charges,
she spent a year in juvenile
detention.
She was 15 years old.
TINA FRUNDT: And I was charged
with prostitution,
you know?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At 15?
TINA FRUNDT: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And Frundt
isn't alone.
One in six children reported to
a federal
database that tracks those who
leave home
are involved in sex trafficking.
Today, she runs Courtney's
House, a Washington,
D.C., nonprofit that counsels
young sex traffic
survivors.
TINA FRUNDT: The reason why the
survivors
bond with me is because my story
really is
their story.
And it happened the same way.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Gabrielle
Martin says more
needs to be done to prevent kids
from leaving
home in the first place.
And she says the answer isn't
simply to publish
more names on the list of kids
missing in
Washington, D.C.
GABRIELLE MARTIN: I know a few
of those people
on that list, and it's like
they're not really
missing persons.
They're people who just chose to
move on,
because what they left behind
sucked.
Like, I think people don't
really care about
kids that are in the system, and
that's what
makes us -- that's what makes us
choose to
run away.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Since the
beginning of the
year, more than 700 young people
have been
reported missing in Washington,
D.C.
Sixteen of those cases remain
open.
The city announced more police
officers are
being assigned to these cases,
and it's creating
a task force to address the
factors driving
kids to leave home in the first
place.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Washington, D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the
analysis of Shields
and Gerson.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
Washington Post columnist
Michael Gerson.
David Brooks is away.
Welcome to you, gentlemen.
There was a special
congressional election
this week, Mark Shields, in
Georgia, the Sixth
District.
MARK SHIELDS: Really?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Really.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: My question is,
the Democrats
fell just short.
Lessons learned, wider
implications, what
did you see?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I saw all of
them.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: The Democrat, a
30-year-old
rookie with experience in public
life of being
a congressional aide on Capitol
Hill, managed
to raise over $8 million from
activists around
the country who are committed
and his own
support, and managed to get,
Judy, more votes
than the first five Republicans
in a district
that Mitt Romney won by 20
points that has
been electing nothing but
Republicans to Congress,
including Dr. Tom Price, the
secretary of
HHS, by -- and Newt Gingrich by
substantial
margins.
But he didn't get the magic 50
percent, which
in the jungle primary of
Georgia, where everybody's
in it, is the magic number.
But I would say it was
impressive.
After Kansas, what it means...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where they had
another special
election.
MARK SHIELDS: Had a special
election, where
the Democrat didn't win, but,
again, in a
district that Donald Trump had
won by 23 points,
he won -- he lost only by seven.
MICHAEL GERSON: Even more
impressive, actually.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, that's right.
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: The Democrats,
they have cut
the margin.
And, right now, I would say the
wind is at
the Democrats' back.
What does that mean?
What is the significance?
The significance is this.
If the Democrats do win,
surprising.
It would be quite surprising if
they could
win in Montana, quite frankly,
because it's
an 11-point Republican
advantage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's another
election coming
up soon.
MARK SHIELDS: For Ryan Zinke's
seat.
If it does, Judy, it means
they're going to
get better candidates.
That's what happens when you win
special elections.
You start to get -- recruit
better candidates
for the next general election,
more attractive,
more appealing, more competent
candidates.
And the other side starts to see
retirements.
Candidates in tough races decide
to spend
more time with their family,
rather than doing
a contested...
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you see
in these tea
leaves?
MICHAEL GERSON: Well, it's not
unusual for
this to happen.
Most presidents in their first
midterms don't
do very well.
But this is happening early.
This is happening 90 days into a
new presidency.
I mean, this is supposed to be a
high point
of presidential influence.
And what we're seeing in both
these data points
is a very serious problem for
Republicans.
They're hurting in places they
shouldn't be
hurting.
And I think that has great
significance.
You know, who knows how it
trends in the future,
but, right now, I think
Republicans are seeing
alarm bells ringing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And knowing that,
if the Democrats
can mount strong candidates in
these districts,
they're in trouble.
Now, that's -- can they do that
in 2018, or
not?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think the
prospect of
winning has encouraged people to
run.
I would just point out, in
defense of the
Sixth District, that, while Mitt
Romney carried
college-educated whites by 14
percent over
Barack Obama in 2012, Donald
Trump only carried
them by four points over Hillary
Clinton.
And this is a district where
college-educated
voters are remarkably -- the
percentage of
them is remarkably high, one of
the 10 highest
in the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael, you
mentioned Republicans
may be feeling a little nervous,
the White
House feeling a little nervous.
Some Republicans feeling
comfortable enough
to start criticizing this
president.
You had two Republican senators
in this past
week.
Joni Ernst -- these are sort of
gentle criticisms
-- the senator from Iowa, came
out and said
the president needs to spend
less time at
his Mar-a-Lago resort on the
weekends, more
time at the White House.
And you had Senator James
Lankford of Oklahoma
and a few other Republicans
saying the president
needs to release his tax
returns.
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this just the
kind of typical
intraparty split, or what?
MICHAEL GERSON: No, I think it
means something.
Every Republican candidate has
to make a Trump
calibration to determine what
percentage they
support the president and what
they don't,
depending on their districts.
Right now, there is a huge
difference between
a president at 60 percent and a
president
in the low 40s.
People feel like they don't need
to explain
things for him that are
difficult to explain.
You watch some members, like Tom
Cotton, a
senator who I really like, a
sharp guy, trying
to defend why the president
won't release
his tax returns, and looks
foolish in the
process.
MARK SHIELDS: Right.
MICHAEL GERSON: So, some of the
cost, the
intimidation factor has been
reduced because
of the president's standing.
And some people are just not
going to put
up with explaining the
unexplainable.
MARK SHIELDS: I agree with
Michael.
Senator Lankford of Oklahoma,
this is the
reddest of red states, Oklahoma.
And he's a true-blue
conservative, no pun
intended, he, Senator James
Lankford.
And he was asked about the tax
returns.
And his answer was, he promised
he would,
and, therefore, he should.
I mean, it was that
straightforward.
That -- it's unassailable logic
that's absolutely
true.
And he had -- he promised a
number of times
that he would do so.
Then he said the promise was --
he, the president,
said the promise was negated
because he won
the election.
The president today, in an
Associated Press
interview, said he was going to
have a big,
huge, wonderful tax cut bill
next week.
And anybody on either side of
the aisle will
have a tough time answering the
question,
if this is the proposal, what
will it mean
for -- what will President
Trump's tax cut
mean for billionaire citizen
Trump's personal
taxes?
And I think that is...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's a
question.
(CROSSTALK)
MICHAEL GERSON: He's materially
undermining
his ability to get that
legislation through
the Congress because of his
refusal to receive
this material.
They are not going to pass,
including many
Republicans, a law without
knowing how it
benefits the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, as far as we
know, there
is no intention, is that right,
on the part
of the White House to -- or the
president
to release it.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, it's a -- I
used to be
a political hack.
Maybe I still am.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: But it's a pretty
safe -- you
have all the Cabinet officers
had to provide
their income information for
confirmation.
Wilbur Ross is a billionaire.
All you have to do is run the
numbers.
What would the proposed tax cut
mean for Wilbur
Ross?
What would it mean for Steve
Mnuchin, the
secretary of the treasury?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MARK SHIELDS: What would it mean
for any of
the...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you don't
have that information
on the president.
MARK SHIELDS: For him.
But it is going to put -- it
will increase
pressure on him.
It will make -- it will put
Republicans very
much on the defensive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two other things.
One is, Michael, some wrinkles
this week when
it comes to foreign policy,
defense policy,
the story about the carrier
group that the
president said was on its way to
North Korea.
It turned out it was heading in
the other
direction.
The Pentagon came back and said,
well, there
was a miscommunication.
And the other is, frankly,
different signals
coming from the Cabinet
officers, from -- even
from the secretary of state, on
Turkey and
from the White House.
Are these just sort of
incidental things that
happen, or what?
How do we read all of this?
MICHAEL GERSON: No, some of it
is real incompetence
in the aircraft carrier
circumstance, but
that might not have been the
White House.
But it was genuine incompetence.
I look at something like the
president saying
that Korea was once part of
China.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
MICHAEL GERSON: That is not just
mispronouncing
a name.
That is offending a country that
is our ally
in the midst of a crisis.
This is serious.
But there are also some
tensions.
There is tension here between
the president's
word, ethno-nationalist, retreat
from the
world, and his personnel, people
that he's
chosen, like McMaster and like
Mattis.
These are internationalists.
They're not consistent with his
public voice.
So, you have those divisions
within the administration.
He has picked a variety of
people that don't
seem to share his foreign policy
vision.
And that creates questions on --
natural questions
on the part of both friends and
enemies: Who
speaks for the administration,
under what
circumstance?
MARK SHIELDS: Thanks to the
public partnership,
private-public partnership, they
keep track
of a very interesting number.
And that is the number of
Senate-confirmable
important positions there are in
every administration.
There is 554 that the Senate has
to confirm
that every president appoints.
As of this moment, 473 have not
been appointed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wow.
MARK SHIELDS: I think -- so, I
think, Judy,
what you have in part is just
they're thin,
their -- the level of
competence, the level
of trust.
There is that lack of
cohesiveness.
But -- and Donald Trump has kind
of boasted
that he's keeping people off
balance.
Every president, when he gets in
trouble domestically
or gets stalled domestically or
just fails
in his domestic agenda, loves to
go on foreign
policy, where he has a far freer
rein.
And he's not the first one to do
this.
But to sustain and forge and
maintain a coalition,
it's based on trust.
It's based not on
unpredictability or mercurial
behavior.
It's based on a sense of
dependability.
And we talk about the USS Carl
Vinson steaming
toward the Indian Ocean, when
they -- the
Koreans were told, our allies,
and the Japanese
were told it was headed toward
the Korean
Peninsula.
And, Judy, that sends tremors,
quite frankly,
through our allies.
And so they have more serious
problems than
just having egg on their face.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And they have
been mocking
the U.S. in China, and certainly
in North
Korea.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The last thing I
want to ask
both of you about comes out of
news from FOX
News Channel, Michael, that Bill
O'Reilly,
who was their, I guess,
highest-rated news
star, has left, been forced out
after these
allegations by a number of women
about sexual
harassment, and, I guess,
secret, until now,
payouts, payments to these
women, $25 million
severance, we're told.
What does this mean in the world
of media?
Certainly, in the world of
conservative media,
it's a big teal.
MICHAEL GERSON: Well, it's an
epic change
in conservative media.
This has been the most important
Republican
influence, I think, bar none,
over the last
15 years.
FOX News has played that role
for many activist
Republicans.
And now the brains of the
operation, Ailes,
and the face of the operation,
O'Reilly, are
gone.
That's a massive change.
It's also an indication just --
maybe one
way to put it is, sometimes,
conservatives
need liberals.
And liberals have been talking
about workplace
equality for a long time.
And they were absolutely right.
This is a case where FOX
tolerated the intolerable,
and did so time after time.
That's a systemic problem.
And I think they need to face
that very directly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just over 30, 40
seconds.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
Judy, I think it's always been
about power
more than about sex, sexual
harassment.
It's men in position of power
who have had
women who have been vulnerable,
who have needed
promotions, who have needed
jobs, who have
needed just sustenance.
And it's all -- and I think what
we see in
this, quite frankly, societally,
is a revolt
and a revolution.
And what we saw, cable TV is
about two things.
It's about eyeballs, the number
of people
who watch it, and it's about
dollar signs.
His eyeballs, the number of
people who watched
Bill O'Reilly, was still up
there, but the
dollar signs were hurting.
Corporate sponsors were
withdrawing.
And it was because women, and
men, too, but
women led it, and they led a
boycott and they
led a threat.
And that, I think, can change
our society
for the better.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Mark
Shields, Michael
Gerson, thank you both.
MICHAEL GERSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
Adam Alter,
a professor at New York
University's Stern
School of Business and the
author of "Irresistible:
The Rise of Addictive
Technology," shares
his humble opinion on our
addiction to technology.
ADAM ALTER, Associate Professor
of Marketing,
New York University Stern School
of Business:
In 2004, I left my family and
friends in Sydney,
Australia, to begin a Ph.D. in
psychology
at Princeton.
I was lucky to find a group of
close friends,
but we were all busy, and at the
end of most
days, I would return to my room
alone.
One night, I stumbled on a
primitive online
slot machine game called Slots.
U.S. law prohibited online
gambling, so I
wasn't playing for real money,
but I found
the game impossible to resist.
Instead of winning money, I
would win small
rewards in the form of bells and
flashing
lights.
Bells and flashing lights may
sound like trivial
rewards, but, in those moments
of loneliness,
they scratched a psychological
itch.
I played so often that I started
to imagine
the reels on the slot machine
spinning during
the day.
Meanwhile, in one of my classes,
we were learning
about a series of experiments on
isolated
caged pigeons.
When the birds were trained to
peck a button
that sometimes delivered food,
but sometimes
delivered nothing, they pecked
the button
hundreds of times, even when
they were no
longer hungry, because their
isolation was
soothed by each gamble.
This was a eureka moment for me.
I was behaving a lot like these
birds.
Slots wasn't nourishing, but I
played for
hours.
My obsession lasted six months,
only ending
when I started dating a
classmate.
I learned that addiction isn't
only about
injecting a drug or playing a
game compulsively.
It also has to scratch a
psychological itch.
For me, that itch was
loneliness.
For someone else, it might be
depression numbed
with narcotics or boredom numbed
with a video
game.
Now, the world has changed a lot
since I stopped
playing Slots more than a decade
ago.
Many of us have those
psychological itches
that need scratching, from
anxiety to stress
to low self-esteem.
And we have access to relief in
the form of
smartphones and tablets.
Wherever we go, those devices
bring us social
networks, games, e-mail, and
text messages,
each delivering or withholding
rewards in
the form of replies, shares, and
likes, just
as that small button did for the
caged lab
animals and slots did for me.
For most of us, it's difficult
to avoid the
screens that deliver addictive
experiences
altogether, so the key is to
live part of
each day screen-free.
Lock your smartphone and tablet
in a drawer
from, say, 5:00 to 7:00 p.m.
You will know you're succeeding
if, for at
least part of the day, you can't
tell that
it's 2017 based only on what you
can see.
When you're looking out at the
ocean or standing
in a forest or having a
conversation with
someone, it could be 2017, but
it could also
be 1950 or 1700.
The key is to make at least a
thin slice of
every day timeless.
JUDY WOODRUFF: "Washington Week"
airs later
tonight on PBS, with its newly
named moderator,
Robert Costa of The Washington
Post.
He's here now to give us a
preview.
Bob, congratulations.
Welcome.
MD-BO /ROBERT COSTA: Thanks so
much, Judy.
It's great to be here.
And we have a great roundtable
tonight to
discuss the apparent disconnect
between the
White House and congressional
Republicans
over the repeal of Obamacare.
And there is so much on tax
reform to discuss,
as well as the border wall that
they're trying
to impose.
Plus, we will explain why Bernie
Sanders is
back on the campaign trail.
That's later tonight on
"Washington Week"
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will be
watching.
And, again, congratulations.
ROBERT COSTA: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on "PBS
NewsHour" Saturday:
Scientists plan to march on
Washington, and
some are even considering a run
for office.
Why did you run for office?
SHAUGHNESSY NAUGHTON, 314
Action: Well, one
of the reasons was, I was really
concerned
about the anti-science rhetoric
we hear out
of so many politicians, and the
cuts to basic
research funding that I think
are putting
us behind, as well as hurting us
economically.
ROB YOUNG, Western Carolina
University: I
think it is problematic when
scientists are
lumping together scientific
issues with other
points of advocacy that may be
viewed as having
a party affiliation or a
particular political
bend.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday.
I will speak to Facebook's
Sheryl Sandberg
about her struggle to move
forward after her
husband's death.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.